Server SHOULD send full-sized datagrams until the path is validated (#4188)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-recovery.md

client receives Handshake or 1-RTT packets prior to obtaining Handshake keys,
it may assume some or all of the server's Initial packets were lost.

To speed up handshake completion under these conditions, an endpoint MAY, for a

> limited number of occasions per each connection, send a packet containing

Reviewer: Why is this necessary?

Reviewer 2: This is the optimization that leads to the infinite regress.  This is attempting to say "A client MUST limit the number of times it sends Initial packets in response to packets it cannot process."

Reviewer 3: FWIW, I am happy with this being limited to once.

Reviewer 3: I really thought when we discussed this optimization, we said to only do this once, but either I'm misremembering or it never made it into the issue(#3080).

@martinthomson Would the case it's not as good would be repeated loss of the server's Initial packet?

Reviewer 2: Yes, repeated loss is what I'm thinking about.  This is likely rare, but early losses on a flow are more common.  I don't have a firm opinion on this point. One is certainly better than none.  But two doesn't seem to be a real problem either.  For what it is worth, I send up to 4.

Reviewer 3: In my experience looking at traces, losing two server Initials in a row is quite rare, and there's still PTO as a backup, so I'm still leaning towards limiting this to once.  Maybe we can require limiting it and specify a RECOMMENDED value of 1 or 2?

Reviewer 2: But now you are telling me what to do without cause :p  But I can live with a recommendation.  My point was that the only hard requirement is that this is limited.

Reviewer: I'm fine with requiring limiting it. To be useful to implementers, we should have some value here, but I would not RECOMMEND it. We can simply say that experience has shown 1 early retransmission to be adequate to accommodate common loss scenarios.

Author: Sounds like we are converging; took a stub in commit 6e0fe53. PTAL.

client receives Handshake or 1-RTT packets prior to obtaining Handshake keys,
it may assume some or all of the server's Initial packets were lost.

To speed up handshake completion under these conditions, an endpoint MAY, for a
limited number of occasions per each connection, send a packet containing
unacknowledged CRYPTO data earlier than the PTO expiry, subject to the address
validation limits in Section 8.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. Doing so at most once

> for each connection will be adequate to accommodate common loss scenarios.

Reviewer 2: I don't think that the packet reflection this is well-enough explained to use it here.

> for each connection will be adequate to accommodate common loss scenarios.

Author: I am in favor of @ianswett's suggestion.

The principles we have for preventing ping-pong are:
* do not repeatedly send an ACK-eliciting ACK
* when not receiving an ACK, rely on PTO backoff

This paragraph is talking when an endpoint MAY violate those rules. Therefore, IMO it is good to point out that risk.

> for each connection will be adequate to accommodate common loss scenarios.

Reviewer 2: I would rather add:

> A client that does not limit the number of times it sends unacknowledged CRYPTO data in response to unauthenticated data risks creating an infinite exchange of packets.

There are other reasons why this might happen (hitting an endpoint that thinks it closed, for example.)

> for each connection will be adequate to accommodate common loss scenarios.

Author: In 3518d54, applied changes suggested by @ianswett to the existing sentence.
In a51ad56, added the rationale suggested by @martinthomson with tweaks. Specifically, I changed the subject to "endpoints" so that it would be generic, and used "back off", as we suggest using that for Stateless Resets, etc.

PTAL.

client receives Handshake or 1-RTT packets prior to obtaining Handshake keys,
it may assume some or all of the server's Initial packets were lost.

To speed up handshake completion under these conditions, an endpoint MAY, for a
limited number of occasions per each connection, send a packet containing
unacknowledged CRYPTO data earlier than the PTO expiry, subject to the address
validation limits in Section 8.1 of {{QUIC-TRANSPORT}}. Doing so at most once
for each connection is adequate to quickly recover from a single packet loss.

> Endpoints that do not back off from retransmitting packets in response to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Endpoints that do not cease retransmitting packets in response to
```

> unauthenticated data risks creating an infinite exchange of packets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
unauthenticated data risk creating an infinite exchange of packets.
```
